---
layout: post
image: moving-out
---

Today Debbie and I moved out of our apartment in Adams Point. We don't
have another place lined up, and on Sunday we're leaving for our
honeymoon in Europe. The nearly four years we spent in this apartment
has been met with a lot of change: We've both had a few jobs, Debbie
worked toward getting into nursing school, and we got married. Needless
to say, that's included a lot of stressful days, and it feels good to
have some change, and to look forward to coming back to a fresh start
together.

As usual, moving was somewhat of a disaster. Thankfully we jumped on the
tidying bandwagon a while ago, but moving definitely made me realize
that it's very much a work in progress. One item in particular gave me
some trouble (and a bit to think about): The Lego Millennium Falcon that
I received as a graduation present. I heard somewhere that one reason
things can hard to get rid of is because they represent the failure of a
dream. It was an ideal gift for someone who treasured Legos as a child.
But building it proved to be incredibly time consuming (I never finished
it) and at nearly three feet long, would take up a huge amount of space.
In my last attempt I enlisted the help of my nephew Sonny, so before I
sold it, I had the skeleton of the ship constructed. As I disassembled
the partially built ship, I asked myself, "am I dismantling my
childhood?" I think I was so wrapped up in the eventual product that I
accepted its completion as an inevitability. I didn't stop to think if
that's what I really wanted to do. I eventually listed and sold it on
eBay. Fortunately it appreciated in value beyond its retail price, so
I'll consider that good graduation present in itself. Lego now has a
line of tiny models (including a Millennium Falcon). I think I'll get
one keep my Nanoblock E231 Yamanote train some company.
